.. _c5.3:

5.3 Internet 中的 AS 内部路由：OSPF
===========================================================
5.3 Intra-AS Routing in the Internet: OSPF

.. tab:: 中文

.. tab:: 英文


In our study of routing algorithms so far, we’ve viewed the network simply as a collection of interconnected routers. One router was indistinguishable from another in the sense that all routers executed the same routing algorithm to compute routing paths through the entire network. In practice, this model and its view of a homogenous set of routers all executing the same routing algorithm is simplistic for two important reasons:

- **Scale**. As the number of routers becomes large, the overhead involved in communicating, computing, and storing routing information becomes prohibitive. Today’s Internet consists of hundreds of millions of routers. Storing routing information for possible destinations at each of these routers would clearly require enormous amounts of memory. The overhead required to broadcast connectivity and link cost updates among all of the routers would be huge! A distance-vector algorithm that iterated among such a large number of routers would surely never converge. Clearly, something must be done to reduce the complexity of route computation in a network as large as the Internet.
- **Administrative autonomy**. As described in :ref:`Section 1.3 <c1.3>`, the Internet is a network of ISPs, with each ISP consisting of its own network of routers. An ISP generally desires to operate its network as it pleases (for example, to run whatever routing algorithm it chooses within its network) or to hide aspects of its network’s internal organization from the outside. Ideally, an organization should be able to operate and administer its network as it wishes, while still being able to connect its network to other outside networks.

Both of these problems can be solved by organizing routers into **autonomous ­systems (ASs)**, with each AS consisting of a group of routers that are under the same administrative control. Often the routers in an ISP, and the links that interconnect them, constitute a single AS. Some ISPs, however, partition their network into multiple ASs. In particular, some tier-1 ISPs use one gigantic AS for their entire network, whereas others break up their ISP into tens of interconnected ASs. An autonomous system is identified by its globally unique autonomous system number (ASN) :ref:`[RFC 1930] <RFC 1930>`. AS numbers, like IP addresses, are assigned by ICANN regional registries :ref:`[ICANN 2016] <ICANN 2016>`.

Routers within the same AS all run the same routing algorithm and have information about each other. The routing algorithm ­running within an autonomous system is called an **intra-autonomous system routing ­protocol**.

Open Shortest Path First (OSPF)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

OSPF routing and its closely related cousin, IS-IS, are widely used for intra-AS routing in the Internet. The Open in OSPF indicates that the routing protocol specification is publicly available (for example, as opposed to Cisco’s EIGRP protocol, which was only recently became open :ref:`[Savage 2015] <Savage 2015>`, after roughly 20 years as a Cisco-proprietary protocol). The most recent version of OSPF, version 2, is defined in :ref:`[RFC 2328] <RFC 2328>`, a public document.

OSPF is a link-state protocol that uses flooding of link-state information and a Dijkstra’s least-cost path algorithm. With OSPF, each router constructs a complete topological map (that is, a graph) of the entire autonomous system. Each router then locally runs Dijkstra’s shortest-path algorithm to determine a shortest-path tree to all subnets, with itself as the root node. Individual link costs are configured by the network administrator (see sidebar, **Principles and Practice: Setting OSPF Weights**). The administrator might choose to set all link costs to 1, thus achieving minimum-hop routing, or might choose to set the link weights to be inversely proportional to link capacity in order to discourage traffic from using low-bandwidth links. OSPF does not mandate a policy for how link weights are set (that is the job of the ­network administrator), but instead provides the mechanisms (protocol) for determining least-cost path routing for the given set of link weights.

.. admonition:: PRINCIPLES IN PRACTICE

    SETTING OSPF LINK WEIGHTS

    Our discussion of link-state routing has implicitly assumed that link weights are set, a routing algorithm such as OSPF is run, and traffic flows according to the routing tables computed by the LS algorithm. In terms of cause and effect, the link weights are given (i.e., they come first) and result (via Dijkstra’s algorithm) in routing paths that minimize overall cost. In this viewpoint, link weights reflect the cost of using a link (e.g., if link weights are inversely proportional to capacity, then the use of high-capacity links would have smaller weight and thus be more attractive from a routing standpoint) and Dijsktra’s algorithm serves to minimize overall cost.

    In practice, the cause and effect relationship between link weights and routing paths may be reversed, with network operators configuring link weights in order to obtain routing paths that achieve certain traffic engineering goals [:ref:`Fortz 2000 <Fortz 2000>`, :ref:`Fortz 2002 <Fortz 2002>`]. For example, suppose a network operator has an estimate of traffic flow entering the network at each ingress point and destined for each egress point. The operator may then want to put in place a specific routing of ingress-to-egress flows that minimizes the maximum utilization over all of the network’s links. But with a routing algorithm such as OSPF, the operator’s main “knobs” for tuning the routing of flows through the network are the link weights. Thus, in order to achieve the goal of minimizing the maximum link utilization, the operator must find the set of link weights that achieves this goal. This is a reversal of the cause and effect relationship—the desired routing of flows is known, and the OSPF link weights must be found such that the OSPF routing algorithm results in this desired routing of flows.


With OSPF, a router broadcasts routing information to all other routers in the autonomous system, not just to its neighboring routers. A router broadcasts link-state information whenever there is a change in a link’s state (for example, a change in cost or a change in up/down status). It also broadcasts a link’s state periodically (at least once every 30 minutes), even if the link’s state has not changed. RFC 2328 notes that “this periodic updating of link state advertisements adds robustness to the link state algorithm.” OSPF advertisements are contained in OSPF messages that are carried directly by IP, with an upper-layer protocol of 89 for OSPF. Thus, the OSPF protocol must itself implement functionality such as reliable message transfer and link-state broadcast. The OSPF protocol also checks that links are operational (via a HELLO message that is sent to an attached neighbor) and allows an OSPF router to obtain a neighboring router’s database of network-wide link state.

Some of the advances embodied in OSPF include the following:

- **Security**. Exchanges between OSPF routers (for example, link-state updates) can be authenticated. With authentication, only trusted routers can participate in the OSPF protocol within an AS, thus preventing malicious intruders (or networking students taking their newfound knowledge out for a joyride) from injecting incorrect information into router tables. By default, OSPF packets between routers are not authenticated and could be forged. Two types of authentication can be configured—simple and MD5 (see :ref:`Chapter 8 <c8>` for a discussion on MD5 and authentication in general). With simple authentication, the same password is configured on each router. When a router sends an OSPF packet, it includes the password in plaintext. Clearly, simple authentication is not very secure. MD5 authentication is based on shared secret keys that are configured in all the routers. For each OSPF packet that it sends, the router computes the MD5 hash of the content of the OSPF packet appended with the secret key. (See the discussion of message authentication codes in :ref:`Chapter 8 <c8>`.) Then the router includes the resulting hash value in the OSPF packet. The receiving router, using the preconfigured secret key, will compute an MD5 hash of the packet and compare it with the hash value that the packet carries, thus verifying the packet’s authenticity. Sequence numbers are also used with MD5 authentication to protect against replay attacks.
- **Multiple same-cost paths**. When multiple paths to a destination have the same cost, OSPF allows multiple paths to be used (that is, a single path need not be chosen for carrying all traffic when multiple equal-cost paths exist).
- **Integrated support for unicast and multicast routing**. Multicast OSPF (MOSPF) :ref:`[RFC 1584] <RFC 1584>` provides simple extensions to OSPF to provide for multicast routing. MOSPF uses the existing OSPF link database and adds a new type of link-state advertisement to the existing OSPF link-state broadcast mechanism.
- **Support for hierarchy within a single AS**. An OSPF autonomous system can be configured hierarchically into areas. Each area runs its own OSPF link-state routing algorithm, with each router in an area broadcasting its link state to all other routers in that area. Within each area, one or more area border routers are responsible for routing packets outside the area. Lastly, exactly one OSPF area in the AS is configured to be the backbone area. The primary role of the backbone area is to route traffic between the other areas in the AS. The backbone always contains all area border routers in the AS and may contain non-border routers as well. Inter-area routing within the AS requires that the packet be first routed to an area border router (intra-area routing), then routed through the backbone to the area border router that is in the destination area, and then routed to the final destination.

OSPF is a relatively complex protocol, and our coverage here has been necessarily brief; [:ref:`Huitema 1998 <Huitema 1998>`; :ref:`Moy 1998 <Moy 1998>`; :ref:`RFC 2328 <RFC 2328>`] provide additional details.