.. _c7.4:

7.4 蜂窝互联网接入
===================================================================
7.4 Cellular Internet Access

.. tab:: 中文

.. tab:: 英文

In the previous section we examined how an Internet host can access the Internet when inside a WiFi hotspot—that is, when it is within the vicinity of an 802.11 access point. But most WiFi hotspots have a small coverage area of between 10 and 100 meters in diameter. What do we do then when we have a desperate need for wireless Internet access and we cannot access a WiFi hotspot?

Given that cellular telephony is now ubiquitous in many areas throughout the world, a natural strategy is to extend cellular networks so that they support not only voice telephony but wireless Internet access as well. Ideally, this Internet access would be at a reasonably high speed and would provide for seamless mobility, allowing users to maintain their TCP sessions while traveling, for example, on a bus or a train. With sufficiently high upstream and downstream bit rates, the user could even maintain video- conferencing sessions while roaming about. This scenario is not that far-fetched. Data rates of several megabits per second are becoming available as broadband data services such as those we will cover here become more widely deployed.

In this section, we provide a brief overview of current and emerging cellular Internet access technologies. Our focus here will be on both the wireless first hop as well as the network that connects the wireless first hop into the larger telephone network and/or the Internet; in :ref:`Section 7.7 <c7.7>` we’ll consider how calls are routed to a user moving between base stations. Our brief discussion will necessarily provide only a simplified and high-level description of cellular technologies. Modern cellular communications, of course, has great breadth and depth, with many universities offering several courses on the topic. Readers seeking a deeper understanding are encouraged to see [:ref:`Goodman 1997 <Goodman 1997>`; :ref:`Kaaranen 2001 <Kaaranen 2001>`; :ref:`Lin 2001 <Lin 2001>`; :ref:`Korhonen 2003 <Korhonen 2003>`; :ref:`Schiller 2003 <Schiller 2003>`; :ref:`Palat 2009 <Palat 2009>`; :ref:`Scourias 2012 <Scourias 2012>`; :ref:`Turner 2012 <Turner 2012>`; :ref:`Akyildiz 2010 <Akyildiz 2010>`], as well as the particularly excellent and exhaustive references [:ref:`Mouly 1992 <Mouly 1992>`; :ref:`Sauter 2014 <Sauter 2014>`].


.. _c7.4.1:

7.4.1 蜂窝网络体系结构概述
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
7.4.1 An Overview of Cellular Network Architecture

.. tab:: 中文

.. tab:: 英文

.. _c7.4.2:

7.4.2 3G 蜂窝移动数据网络：将 Internet 扩展到蜂窝移动用户
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
7.4.2 3G Cellular Data Networks: Extending the Internet to Cellular Subscribers

.. tab:: 中文

.. tab:: 英文

.. _c7.4.3:

7.4.3 进入 4G：LTE
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
7.4.3 On to 4G: LTE

.. tab:: 中文

.. tab:: 英文


